How India Is Squandering Its Top Export: The Buddha
Dzongsar Jamyang Khyentse 




India and Nepal gave the world one of its most precious resources -
the Buddha. Yet neither country truly values this extraordinary legacy, 
let alone takes pride in it. In the Buddha's own birthplace and homeland, 
his teachings are marginalised, his wisdom is unappreciated, and his 
legacy is invisible in society.

The pervasive neglect of this treasured inheritance is an inestimable loss. 
After all, few products from this region have ever been so widely valued 
and respected, or traveled as far and as successfully, as the teachings 
of the Buddha.

Yes-yoga, curry, basmati rice and Bollywood have their global influence. 
But Buddhism has transformed whole societies in China, Thailand, 
Burma, Vietnam, Japan and more, is fast penetrating the Western world, 
and continues to touch the hearts and minds of millions around the 
world.And yet, amazingly, this intense global interest is barely evident in 
the lands where the Buddha himself was born, became enlightened, and 
taught. 

It is unfathomable that neither governments nor the vast majority of
people here in India and Nepal truly cherish the Buddha today or hold 
him in their hearts and minds as one of their own.This lack of concern 
for their Buddhist heritage is both a leadership failure and an endemic 
societal blindness. In Nepal, interest in Buddhism only seems to be 
roused when someone claims the Buddha was born in India, at which 
time the Nepalese zealously declare their own country as his birthplace - 
even though neither Nepal nor India existed as entities 2,500 years ago.

In India the blindness extends from the failure of India's educated elite
to learn about, appreciate, and preserve their country's Buddhist 
heritage all the way to those who make a living selling Buddha's pictures 
and bodhi beads at pilgrimage sites, and to the fake monks and charlatans
who score donations from unsuspecting Buddhist pilgrims. And this 
disregard for Buddhism is manifest everywhere, like at the bookstore at Varanasi airport -- the gateway for countless pilgrims to the sacred site 
of the Buddha's first teaching -- which carries not a single book on Buddhism 
in the midst of its rich Hindu and Indian collection.And it is manifest even at
the most sacred Buddhist shrine in the world, the Mahabodhi Temple in Bodhgaya, where the Buddha became enlightened, which remains under majority Hindu management - a situation akin to having the Vatican or the Kaaba in Mecca run by a majority of Buddhists, or a Jewish congregation run 
by mostly Protestants.


Secularism and political correctness in India
It is not easy to explain this wilful neglect. To some extent the plight of Buddhism in India today may be a legacy of the country's long colonial 
history, which seems to have led to a wholesale embrace of secular values 
at the cost of forsaking India's own profound spiritual heritage.

One recent example is the supposed revival of Nalanda, the world's oldest 
and greatest Buddhist university, which predated the founding of Oxford University by 650 years. The project's first Chancellor, Amartya Sen -- in 
the name of a firm "distinction between religious studies and the practice 
of religion"-- indicated he would tone down any Buddhist or spiritual teaching 
in favour of a secular curriculum. Indeed Prof. Sen writes about Nalanda with 
no mention of its Buddhist heritage.

India purports to value its heritage, but in practice acts more in accord with Western, worldly, materialist and non-spiritual values than with the 
profound wisdom its traditions have bequeathed to the world. And so, while India proudly claims its place as the world's largest democratic country, the Buddha remains a stranger to most Indians. Indeed, India's educated intellectuals know more about Marx and Marxism than about Buddha and Buddhism.

"In the case of the Hindu and Muslim destruction of Buddhism... India has unfortunately opted for a more cowardly political correctness. It has given in to the pressure of violence and intimidation, but has failed to reward non-violence with any protective action."
Western secular political correctness is on display even at the entrance to the Nalanda ruins, where the historical marker fails to mention that the university and its huge, invaluable library were actually destroyed in 1193 by Muslims on religious grounds because its texts did not uphold the Qur'an. The government prefers to tell visitors simply that the destroyer was a man by the name of Bakhtiyar Khilji.
Diluting the truth and watering down historical facts in the name of secular political correctness serves nobody. On the contrary, denying reality and burying the truth actually nurture extremism, even in traditionally non-violent cultures like Burma where Buddhists have acted violently towards Muslim neighbours.

Imagine the anger and accusations of anti-Semitism that would erupt in 
New York City if the government and scholars actively toned down the 
history of the Holocaust. For that matter, imagine how Indians would 
react if officials and scholars toned down past British exploitation and 
misdeeds in India.Scholars, journalists, panelists and experts will do 
more to serve peace and harmony today by telling the truth about the 
Muslim destruction of Nalanda and other Buddhist icons - historically in 
India and recently in Afghanistan - than by hiding it.

Western and Indian apologists for Islam argue that they are promoting tolerance, and that other religions have also engaged in destructive 
behaviour, like the Christians during the Crusades. They also have a 
habit of praising Buddhists for their generally non-violent response to provocation.This form of apparent tolerance is more akin to a sophisticated political correctness than to genuine tolerance and open-mindedness. 
Imagine covering up a brutal assault by praising the victim for not 
retaliating and by diverting attention to other assaults.

By contrast, telling the truth, which includes naming the assailant, is 
essential to nurture true love and compassion, which in the Buddhist 
view is inseparable from wisdom. Such honesty would do much to temper 
the impulse for revenge and retaliation, and even to reveal the truly heroic 
and courageous nature of non-violent response. In fact, that's precisely 
how Indian historians salute Gandhi's greatness and fearless non-violence - 
by exposing, not covering up, British brutalities during India's Independence struggle.

In the case of the Hindu and Muslim destruction of Buddhism in India, 
however, India has unfortunately opted for a more cowardly political correctness. It has given in to the pressure of violence and intimidation, 
but has failed to reward non-violence with any protective action. Thus, 
while the Delhi airport decks out a special terminal for hajj pilgrims, there 
is no comparable support for Buddhist pilgrimage sites in India.

Only two religions matter in India
However, secularism alone cannot explain India's wanton neglect of its 
Buddhist heritage, as witnessed by ongoing Hindu-Muslim sensitivities 
that show religion still does matter in the country. Hindus, for example, 
are incensed by the Gyanvapi Mosque in Varanasi occupying the site of 
an ancient Hindu temple, and they even destroyed the Babri mosque in 
Ayodhya in order to build a Hindu temple; Muslims in Bengal and in neighbouring Bangladesh and Pakistan have attacked Hindu temples.

Yet India has no compunction about refusing to allow Buddhists to run 
the holiest of their sites, completely brushing off the fact that Bodhgaya 
is to Buddhists what Mecca is to Muslims. And so, perhaps it is not just 
secularism at play here, but rather that when push comes to shove, the 
only religion with influence in India has to be fanatical and violent-whether
its adherents are orange-clad or green-clad.

In fact the demise of Buddhism in India is attributable to both the country's major religions, with Islam in effect finishing off what Hinduism began. Thus 
it was Brahmanic pressure from the 5th century onwards that converted so many Buddhist temples into Hindu places of worship, with Muslim invaders 
then destroying what remained.

The legacy of this ancient religious imperialism remains evident today not 
only in Hindu management of Buddhist sacred places but is even enshrined 
in the Constitution of India itself. There, Article 25 declares that "reference 
to Hindus shall be construed as including a reference to persons professing 
the Sikh, Jaina or Buddhist religion, and the reference to Hindu religious institutions shall be construed accordingly".

Whatever the historical antecedents, today's sad reality is that the 
governments and people of Nepal, India, and Bihar are notoriously poor 
hosts to the hundreds of thousands of pilgrims who come here every year
to pay homage and respect to the life and teachings of Gautama Buddha. 
From the top echelons of leadership to the lowest beggar syndicates in the streets, there is no evidence of any inclination to accommodate, help or be 
kind to these pilgrims from afar, beyond extorting money from them in 
every conceivable way.

To be fair, we cannot blame the woes of Nalanda, Bodhgaya, or Sarnath 
entirely on non-Buddhists. Mahayana chauvinists and Theravada elitists 
also operate in their own worlds, and the Buddhist temples around Bodhgaya rarely join in solidarity on any issue less mundane than obtaining an electric 
line or improving water supply. Rather than celebrating their common heritage 
in shared teachings, meditation, devotional rituals and festivals, they often seem more intent on promoting their own sects and drowning out each other's prayers with their own particular liturgies on blaring amplifiers.

In response to my criticisms of India's lack of care for its Buddhist heritage, 
my Hindu friends are quick to note that Buddhism is essentially part of
Hinduism and that Buddha was an avatar of Vishnu. Regardless of philosophical issues, that argument falters on simple human, social and emotional grounds, since Hinduism's gains, glories, and leverage are never shared with Buddhists.



Neglect of Buddhism is India's loss
Whichever way one looks at it -- whether merely through the worldly lens 
of business, politics, national pride, export opportunity, foreign policy or for deeper spiritual reasons - the pervasive neglect of its Buddhist inheritance 
is truly a sad loss for India.


Even from a purely secular, business perspective, places like Bodhgaya and Lumbini are potential gold mines. Just within my own short stay recently in Bodhgaya, two foreign heads of state visited the Mahabodhi Temple to pay 
their respects. Indeed, foreign dignitaries, army generals, and other notables regularly come to Bodhgaya not for any conference or negotiation but simply 
to pay homage, not to mention the thousands of pilgrims who come on a daily basis from all over the world -- Europe, Russia, south and southeast Asia, 
China, the Americas, Australia and more.

And if some politics are inevitable, India actually holds a foreign policy trump card, because Bodhgaya and the other Buddhist pilgrimage sites in the country are assets that transcend all sectarian and political divisions, including on sensitive issues like Tibet. After all, these pilgrimage sites are sacred to all Buddhists of every tradition - without exception - and thus remain eternal reminders of the elemental truths the Buddha taught.

From a simple export value perspective, compare the quality of India's 
rich Buddhist heritage and the respect it commands worldwide to the embarrassingly shoddy quality of so many of India's other products - 
from postage stamps that don't stick to door latches that don't fit. How 
sad that India does not cherish, let alone market, one of the greatest 
creations it has ever produced - the stainless teachings and wisdom of 
Gautama Buddha.

And even from the point of view of simple national pride, it's worth remembering that neither Vishnu nor Shiva would attain Indian or
Nepalese citizenship today because they are gods. By contrast the 
Buddha was an actual human being from their own land, whose wisdom, teaching and example continue to touch the hearts and minds of millions 
around the world, including in the land of India's arch-nemesis, China. 
It is almost incomprehensible that neither India nor Nepal today shows 
any vested interest in his legacy.

A matter of attitude
Given this pervasive disinterest and neglect, it is not surprising that any 
real improvements in Bodhgaya and other Buddhist sacred sites are 
largely the initiative of foreigners or Tibetan refugees, who usually have 
to bribe their way at every step to get anything done.

The Indian government and people's lack of regard for such generous contributions from abroad is well illustrated by a recent incident in the impoverished region of Dhungeshwari, where the Buddha practised 
austerities for six years before attaining enlightenment.

There Delhi bureaucrats imposed a massive Rs 9 million fine on a school
started by a Korean Buddhist monk for 500 local disadvantaged children, 
and thereby forced the school -- unable to pay the fine and cut off from 
outside funds -- to close temporarily.

When the school went to court - a brave action, especially in Bihar - to
appeal the unjust ruling, a high court judge to his credit quashed the fine 
and publicly upbraided the Government of India for penalising a Buddhist-
run school that was helping India's poorest and doing what the government itself should have been doing.

In this rare case, justice was eventually served. But the lengthy bureaucratic harassment that preceded the judgment points to a larger attitudinal problem 
in India's perspective on Buddhism altogether.

One component of that attitude stems from caste issues that are still so powerfully dominant in India today. Millions of Buddhists in the state of Maharashtra, who were brought to the Buddhist path by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, 
are less committed to the teachings of the Buddha than to their wish to be 
free of the stigma of their low caste status. Important and understandable though that wish is, such a social and political agenda may not be helpful 
either to their own spiritual path or to Buddhism altogether.

Thus, a highly educated Indian friend accompanying me to my daily 
meditation at the Mahabodhi Temple in Bodhgaya was recently quizzed 
by the Indian security guards as to why he was coming there every day, 
and was he an authorised guide. Assuming that Buddhism was either for foreigners or for the lowest caste Indians, these security guards could not fathom what the interest of an educated high-caste Indian might be.

And if this puzzlement exists at the very entrance to Buddhism's most sacred shrine, there may be little hope for a change of attitude towards Buddhism in Indian society or in the Indian national psyche at large.

china buddhism

India and China play the Buddhist card
Recently India has started to show some signs of mild interest in relating to 
its Buddhist heritage, particularly in the Himalayan region, largely because China is so actively providing support for Buddhist sacred sites on the other 
side of the Himalayas.

In that regard, it's worth recalling statistical estimates that about 20% of Chinese are Buddhists, compared to less than 1% of Indians in the land 
of the Buddha's enlightenment - a percentage that has not changed in 
centuries. In fact, China has by far the largest Buddhist population in the 
world (amounting to more than half of all the world's Buddhists), while 
India's Buddhists amount to less than 2% of the world's total.

In contrast to the long history of neglect of Buddhism in India, China 
celebrates a number of historic and iconic Buddhist scholars and patrons. 
For example, the Chinese revere Xuanzang, to whom Buddhists are indebted
for keeping record of the most sacred sites of the Buddha's life and enlightenment. And the patronage of generations of Chinese dynasties and emperors (like Emperor Ming in the Han dynasty, Emperor Wu in the Lang dynasty, and Empress Wu Zetian in the Tang dynasty) has ensured the 
survival of Buddhism outside the land of its birth.

"[R]ather than emulate Buddhism's resurgence in China, India -- ever suspicious of Chinese spying -- still erects bureaucratic barriers for many of the hundreds of thousands of Chinese Buddhists eager to visit India on pilgrimage each year."
And this patronage is not just ancient or historical. Even today it's revealing to observe the sheer magnitude, detail, and scale of care and veneration lavished by China - a supposedly atheist country - on the preservation of the Buddha's finger bone at Famen Temple in Xi'an, for example, compared to the sub-standard way the Buddha's relics are treated at the National Museum in New Delhi, where even the reliquary was a donation from Thailand.

Of course we will never forget that the Chinese destroyed Buddhist temples, texts and teachers, both in the 1950s and during the Cultural Revolution. But those actions, 
over a very short time period, were politically not religiously motivated, 
and a strong revival of Buddhism is now underway in China.

This is in sharp contrast to the historical Brahmanic persecution of 
Buddhists and the subsequent centuries-long decimation of Buddhism 
in India by the Muslims, from both of which Indian Buddhism has never recovered.Yet, rather than emulate Buddhism's resurgence in China, 
India - ever suspicious of Chinese spying - still erects bureaucratic 
barriers for many of the hundreds of thousands of Chinese Buddhists 
eager to visit India on pilgrimage each year. But India should understand 
that just as an Indian Hindu might feel more comfortable with a British Hinduthan with an Indian Muslim, Sri Lankan or Ladakhi Buddhists regard 
these visiting Chinese pilgrims simply as fellow Buddhist brethren.

And just as Muslims, destitute, colonised or downtrodden in their own 
lands, might take pride as fellow Muslims in Saudi Arabia's power and 
wealth, or like Jews around the world might take pride in Israel, so 
Buddhists in Bangladesh, Indonesia, and other places that suffered 
foreign invasion, or in small, poor countries like Bhutan, might rejoice 
in China's emergence as a superpower.

In sum, rather than succumbing to old fear-driven habits and suspicions, 
India might learn from and even join with the Buddhist renaissance in China 
by proudly proclaiming its own land, heritage and sacred sites as the 
birthplace and source of the Buddha's enlightenment, wisdom and teachings.

buddha nepal

Returning Buddhism to its rightful place
In this article, I've tried to point to some possible historical, political, 
strategic, religious, philosophical, caste and other explanations for this 
region's heedless squandering of its rich and profound Buddhist heritage. 
But, whatever the reasons to date, the bottom line is that it doesn't have 
to be this way. A conscious shift of view, not difficult to achieve, could not 
only acknowledge but take tremendous pride in the legacy of a man whose contribution to humankind remains unsurpassed.

In this materialist era in which greed is literally destroying the earth on 
which our survival depends, the need to hear and contemplate the 
Buddha's truth on the interdependent nature of all reality is more pressing
than ever. At the policy and behavioural level, such contemplation might 
even temper excess consumption, prevent further resource depletion, 
preserve endangered habitats, and leave the planet in a habitable condition 
for our children.

What exceptional satisfaction and esteem India and Nepal could enjoy in 
the world today if they were now to take full ownership of the life and 
teachings of one of the most remarkable and brilliant human beings ever 
to walk the earth. With relatively little effort, the extraordinarily rich 
ancient heritage of India and Nepal could merge with expanding current 
needs and interests in the world to leave an unparalleled legacy to all 
beings and to the earth itself.

This article may sound harsh in some of its critique, but nothing milder will 
do if we are to see the fundamental shift in attitude and view now needed 
to return Buddhism to its rightful, precious, and crucial place in the history, culture, and tradition of India and Nepal.